Cape Town - The health and wellbeing of children in Flamingo Heights informal settlement near Lansdowne has raised an alarm after several children became covered in sores from the filthy living and playing conditions.  Founder of community outreach organisation Indipam, Pamela Tosh, said the community was densely populated. “The situation here is that the community has gotten bigger and the infrastructure has not been developed with the growth of the community to accommodate the amount of sewage.  “The environment is extremely dirty especially for the children and the dogs.  “The drains behind the external toilets break easily and overflow into the pathways where the children play,” Tosh said.  She said children now have developed sores that look like large pimples.  “The problem is if they are not treated with a cream or with a plaster they remain wet and damp. So those small sores become wider and they become deeper wounds.  “The health and wellbeing of children is getting worse.  “We need more mobile solutions, medical camps, and ongoing support from stakeholders with the help of ward councillor implementation thereafter it is crucial that social development works with stakeholders like me so we can tackle all these issues simultaneously,” she said. Ward 60 councillor Mark Kleinschmidt said there was an issue of a blocked sewer which was caused by foreign objects being flushed down toilets.  “I personally escalated this issue to the Water and Sanitation directorate. Both residents and so called concerned persons must report the incidents of blocked sewers and other service requests. City Social services directorate conducts many hygiene and clean-living programs at Flamingo Heights Informal Settlement Lansdowne,” he said. Stellenbosch University epidemiologist, Dr Jo Barnes, said skin conditions like those that the children presented were often found, particularly in children, under very unhygienic conditions.  “Such children are also relatively frequently poorly fed and their general resistance to disease is low. You may also notice, eye and ear infections. The most frequent one is, however, diarrhoea.  “The local authority should do all in its power to provide basic toilet facilities and a minimum amount of clean water to such places to prevent outbreaks of hygiene-related diseases like these,” she said.  The City’s Environmental Health Service said it is looking into the matter and will respond in due course. Cape Times