Durban – KwaZulu-Natal Premier Sihle Zikalala started and ended the week on a bad note after he was bashed by Inkosi Mangosuthu Buthelezi in Parliament. Before the rebuke by Buthelezi, Zikalala had already started the week on a bad note after he was accused by former Ukhozi FM presenter, Ngizwe Mchunu, of assaulting him. Mchunu claimed Zikalala assaulted him while he was drunk during a Zulu traditional dance festival known as Ingoma Kazwelonke, held at Moses Mabhida Stadium in Durban. Mchunu pressed assault charges and in a fight back, Zikalala pressed assault and crimen injuria charges against Mchunu. Both cases are now being investigated by the SAPS. Buthelezi, who is the Zulu monarch’s traditional prime minister, IFP president emeritus and parliamentary leader, lambasted Zikalala for ridiculing him in public after he allegedly told the Children’s Parliament that he was incomprehensible because he stutters. Before making his party contribution following Thursday’s budget vote by President Cyril Ramaphosa, Buthelezi asked for a moment to address Zikalala’s alleged ridiculing of his speech. “Before I speak to this budget, allow me to check with the (IFP) president whether he is able to understand me. Am I speaking clearly enough, your excellency? Or is my ‘speech impediment’ causing difficulties?” “I ask because your premier in KwaZulu-Natal has publicly ridiculed me, telling the Children’s Parliament that the traditional prime minister to the Zulu monarch and the Zulu nation is incomprehensible because he stammers. “He even did a lively impersonation, encouraging the children of the Zulu kingdom to mock the king’s prime minister,” Buthelezi said. He also lamented that Zikalala had poked fun at his speech in the presence of his eldest daughter princess Phumzile Buthelezi, who is also the chairperson of the IFP Women’s Brigade. “What kind of a leader is that? A leader who gets into drunken brawls in public, embarrassing his party, his office and our country? It pains me that Africa’s oldest liberation movement is discredited by leaders of Premier Zikalala’s ilk,” Buthelezi said. Now the video of Zikalala mocking Buthelezi has emerged. But the video does not give the entire context, as it is short (45 seconds). “I hope princess Phumzile won’t report me at home, we have got a leader here, Mangosuthu Buthelezi, he would speak and speak, but when he drives the point where he wants to tell you something, he would speak like has impaired speech, yet he has none. Yoouuu Yoouu see, so you will see that he wants to drive to the point now. So don’t try to be others, inspiring leaders those who tell you as it is,” Zikalala said. sihle.mavuso@inl.co.za Daily News