Durban - Inkosi Rubert Sifiso Shinga has been appointed as the new provincial Chairperson for the House of Traditional and Khoi-San leaders.  Inkosi Shinga was sworn in as the chairperson for the House of Traditional and Khoi-San leaders on Wednesday in Durban.  Inkosi Nqayizivele Wiseman Sithole from uThukela District was elected as the new deputy chairperson. Welcoming the appointments, Martin Meyer, DA KwaZulu-Natal spokesperson on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (COGTA), said the party recognises and respects the role and importance of traditional leaders in the province.  “The DA also understands that traditional leadership plays a critical role in the fight against social ills, as well as working hand in hand with the local government to provide service delivery in rural communities.” Meyer added that the DA in KZN congratulates Inkosi Shinga and the entire new structure and wishes them well in their new responsibilities.  “The DA is willing to work together with all legitimate leadership structures in our society to ensure that the lives of our people are improved.” The swearing-in ceremony was attended by KZN Premier Sihle Zikalala and Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs MEC Sipho Hlomuka. Zikalala said that the elections are testament to the fact that democracy is alive and well within the institution of traditional leadership in our province.  “What we have just witnessed is the pinnacle of the process of re-establishment of the House of Traditional and Khoi-San Leaders in our province in line with the law. This process is part of our journey to restore the legitimacy of the institution of traditional leaders enjoyed prior to the distortions introduced by colonial and apartheid regime.” Zikalala added: “One cannot over emphasise the importance of this institution in social cohesion and nation building. We look up to it to provide leadership in uniting the people of KwaZulu-Natal, deepening peace, fighting social ills, and defeating the shameful scourge of gender-based violence and femicide. We must also work together to address the rife killing of Traditional Leaders, Amakhosi and Izinduna. We will continue working with the newly constituted House to ensure that all planned interventions are continued until perpetrators are arrested.” THE MERCURY