Durban - With the attention now on the upcoming regional conference of the ANC in Johannesburg this weekend, one of the contestants, Dada Morero, has backing from an unlikely voting delegate. Morero, who will be up against Eunice Mgcina for the position of regional chairperson, is being backed by Phapano Phasha, the former chairperson of the Anti-Poverty Forum, which shot to fame in 2019 when it took on Eskom over its multimillion contracts with independent power producers (IPPs). Writing on Facebook on Wednesday, Phasha said her ANC branch in Roodepoort which recently elected her as it chair, instructed to vote from Morero. Phasha is the branch’s delegate number one, and she will also be voting on its behalf. “The branch mandate is clear – Dada Morero for regional chairperson. Only the best, politically, ideologically, and academically, must lead the ANC. A new re-imagined ANC must have standards and appreciate the complexities of governance, and the electorate yearns for this ANC. Comrade Dada is not only a product of Cosas and the broader congress movement, he loves education. He holds an MBA, two postgraduate degrees, and is still studying while he holds executive positions as a board member,” she wrote. Again, she said her branch had warned delegates not to fall for the temptation of being bought in order to sway their voting patterns. “Our second mandate is that we must refuse to be bought.” Just like during the fiercely contested eThekwini regional conference in April this year, the Johannesburg regional conference is being rocked by claims that some delegates have been approached with cash offers in return for voting in a certain way. According to Phasha, Morero is the only leader who is capable enough to help the ANC dislodge the DA-led coalition in the city of Johannesburg. "We must elect a regional leader who will help us win back the City of Joburg, and currently the ANC is very weak in the Joburg Council from a leadership perspective. We have never seen a paper or battle of ideas from our caucus leaders exposing the racist and deceitful attitude of the DA, which is anti-poor and anti-black. Instead, the DA is cruising nicely in council chambers. We need a marshal in those chambers. Currently, the DA has no opposition in the city.“ sihle.mavuso@inl.co.za Daily News