A JOBURG businessman admitted in court that he and his wife received a nearly R1.1m insurance payout after they falsely reported their SUV hijacked during their January 2018 holiday in Durban. Instead, the husband parked their BMW X5 at the business premises of a friend in Durban, who was not aware of the plan the apparently cash-strapped couple had hatched, while police searched in vain. However, Nivesh Seevnarayan, a car dealership owner, stood alone when he made his Section 112 guilty plea and received the subsequent sentencing from Magistrate Anand Maharaj at the Durban Regional, on Friday. His wife Rashika overdosed and died days after learning that the specialist investigators working on their case had unravelled their scheme, and her arrest was looming. Section 112 pleas are made voluntarily and only becomes effective once the presiding officer is satisfied with the facts and that the accused person was indeed guilty. Seevnarayan pleaded guilty to fraud, defeating the administration of justice and statutory perjury. Thereafter the National Prosecuting Authority’s Asset Forfeiture Unit (AFU) lodged a confiscation order application in terms of Section 18 of the Prevention of Organised Crime Act, and asked that Seevnarayan pay R50 000. The cash will be directed to the Criminal Assets Recovery Account (Cara), which has been set-up to aid the country’s crime-fighting machinery. The three counts that Seevnarayan faced were merged into one and he was sentenced to five years imprisonment, wholly suspended for five years, provided he did not repeat the offences in the period of suspension. He was also instructed to pay R50 000 towards the Cara by March 30. Initially, Seevnarayan and his wife claimed they were victims of an armed robbery on M4 Highway, near the Sibaya Casino. Seevnarayan told police he was intoxicated and his wife drove X5 that was in her name. Seevnarayan alleged they were hijacked at gunpoint by a small group of men who posed as police officers, travelling in a white VW Golf fitted with blue lights. He also claimed he was assaulted by the men and their valuables, including jewellery worth more than a R1m, were taken. Seevnarayan and his wife would have believed everything was going as planned, especially after Dial Direct paid  R 1 094 870 in lieu of the missing vehicle. But a team of detectives from the Saps KZN’s Provincial Investigation Unit, led by Warrant Officer Rajen Nagesar, picked apart the Seevnarayans’ plan. Through informer assistance, the team tracked the vehicle to Dulesh Roopnarain’s business premises. Roopnarain has since been charged and convicted for his involvement in a separate matter. In housing the vehicle, the court concluded that he was in possession of stolen property, even though he was not aware of the couple’s plan. He received a R20 000 fine. State prosecutor Advocate Kuveshni Pillay, on Friday said Seevnarayan was a “deceptive person”. His actions were “premeditated”, and it would have cost the Saps about R200 000 in resources, in investigating the matter and ensuring Seevnarayan’s court appearance. Pillay said Nagesar and his team, who were highly skilled and experienced, were misled, until they saw through the Seevnarayans’ scheme. She said Seevnarayan giving the investigators the runaround was akin to a “donkey chasing its tail.” “Their time and resources could have been better utilised,” said Pillay. In mitigation of sentencing, attorney Sunil Singh said Seevnarayan cooperated with the State from the outset and pleaded guilty to the respective charges. Singh told the court his client was in poor health, supported a teenage child and had to deal with the death of his wife, as a consequence of their actions. Maharaj accepted Seevnarayan’s guilty plea on the basis that he took responsibility for his actions. During sentencing, Maharaj said he agreed that Seevnarayan’s crimes were premeditated. “You roped in another person (Roopnarain) to facilitate your crimes… “I am quite alarmed by what the prosecutor said about the total cost of engaging the services of the Saps’ special investigating unit. Your act of dishonesty and deception was found out.” Maharaj said he considered various factors in arriving at the sentence handed. “I can say that you are quite fortunate. Under normal circumstances I would have handed you a custodial sentence.” The magistrate said he was satisfied with AFU’s application, led by Advocate Rajendhrie Naidoo, and the money collected would go towards the fight against crime. “I’m hoping that in paying this amount of money you (Seevnarayan) would have learnt your lesson.” SUNDAY TRIBUNE