SIBONISO MNGADI DURBAN - The KwaZulu-Natal Department of Agriculture and Rural Development has suspended its staff-member who was photographed transporting voters with a state vehicle during the by-election in Bergville. The by-elections took place across the province on Wednesday, in areas where councillor candidates had passed away during the local government elections in November. According to the department, the official, employed as an agricultural advisor had been authorised to transport farming amenities such as seeds and fertilisers to a community in Bergville, near Ladysmith. However, the vehicle was photographed carrying what is believed to be voters of a political party to a voting station. In the picture that has since gone viral on social media, a branded white bakkie registered to the state was captured ferrying a load of voters, who were clad in political party’s regalia. The department has since placed the official in question on the precautionary suspension pending a full investigation. Bongi Sithole-Moloi, KZN MEC for Agriculture and Rural Development condemned the act, instructing senior officials to apply disciplinary measures to hold the responsible official accountable. She said the implicated official would be placed on suspension for the duration of the investigation. “We trust our officials to deliver services to the people.  Unfortunately, an official has used the state vehicle for other reasons not related to service delivery. We expect our officials to act within the laws and regulations of the department to render services to the people. State vehicles shall not be used for any other reason other than service delivery.  This cannot be correct, we have many people waiting to be served by our officials as agricultural advisors, but the resources are diverted to other things. I strongly condemn what this official did and we are currently investigating the matter. With the evidence we have received so far, we decided to place the official on precautionary suspension,” she said. Sithole-Moloi has also appealed to all political parties to condemn the use of state resources for political reasons. She said in times when the country was crippled by unemployment, poverty and inequality, all resources of the state should be used to change the unfortunate situation. “Officials are not politicians but civil servants, they are entrusted with delivering services to our people. They must leave politics to politicians and continue to do the work which they have applied for through the Z83 system,” said MEC Sithole-Moloi. Sithole-Moloi further encouraged members of the community to report government officials who were abusing state resources. She added: “These resources are meant to help the government to fight poverty and help our people who are eager to venture into the farming sector, not for political campaigning. I am disappointed by this act, and I hope the department will ensure that this never happens again.” SUNDAY TRIBUNE