SIBONISO MNGADI THE VIP bodyguards of the eThekwini Municipality’s top brass have proposed a top-up of R40 000 tax-free fixed allowance on top of their salaries for working irregular hours as the city plans to cut down on overtime. This follows a decision by the city’s security management unit to cut down its exorbitant overtime bill as a cost-cutting measure. But the VIP protectors, who work overtime almost daily, proposed that their salaries be topped up by R40 000 as a standard allowance in lieu of overtime. The VIP protectors, an entry level were said to be earning between R240 000 to R260 000 per annum, excluding overtime. Their salaries roughly equate to between R20 000 and R21 000 a month. The pay level may differ, depending on the number of services provided, and the rank of officers.  The average overtime pay for bodyguards was said to be over 100 hours, per person, per month and amounted to millions of rand. Last month it was reported that the city’s overtime bill amounted to R90 million for the security management unit which included the metro police. While their overtime pay has not yet been cut, some have approached management. Several bodyguards gathered at Durban's City Hall last week to seek clarity from the executives at city hall about the looming cuts. But the hall was cordoned off and no one was allowed to get inside. According to a security official who was among the group, he said they were not on strike but went to the city to seek clarity.  “We are concerned about working without knowing whether we will be remunerated. We were told to continue working while the proposal we made was being considered.  “We have been hearing about the overtime cut, yet we work overtime every day,” he said. The VIP protectors were responsible for protecting the mayor, speaker, city manager and any other officials and councillors whose lives may be found to be in danger.  Sipho Shinga, deputy chairperson of the Independent Municipal and Allied Trade Union confirmed that workers went to the city hall out of frustration over their overtime pay. He said while they were all paid last month, there were concerns that they may not get overtime this month. He said the proposal was made to top up salaries by R40 000 as a standard allowance and cancel overtime to save costs. “We believe this is a suitable solution that is being used in other metros in the country. The reality is that the VIP protectors work overtime beyond the prescribed hours set by the municipality. They have to work overtime.  “We proposed the allowance, we can settle for R35 000 tax-free allowance. It is hard for them to work fixed hours because they exceed the prescribed overtime already. “Another thorny issue was that bodyguards work interchangeably, so it was difficult to apply a blanket approach. “The negotiations are still ongoing with the city. When they went to deliver their concerns, all senior managers were not available, as they attended a mayoral lekgotla this week,” said Shinga. Xolani Dube, regional secretary of the  South African Municipal Workers Union (Samwu) said they had not declared a dispute with the municipality and they would continue to engage in talks to ensure workers in the security unit were remunerated equivalent to the hours worked. “We heard about those who went to the city hall, but we are not sure whether they are our members or from the other union. We will discuss with our shop stewards and address issues with the city leaders,” said Dube. Msawakhe Mayisela, spokesperson for the municipality said the city was aware of the issues around the security officials, and was addressing them. “This is a very sensitive matter that involves the safety of the leaders and principal. The city requests to be given time to address it internally so that it does not compromise the safety and security of those involved. We can confirm that the city is pulling out all the stops to reduce the overtime bill,” said Mayisela. SUNDAY TRIBUNE