LINDA GUMEDE A north coast family is still baffled about why their dog Jadu was shot twice, allegedly by their neighbour who is a policeman.  Suvasha Gapipershad alleged that her neighbour, a SAPS police officer, shot their 10 year-old pit bull while it was walking on their driveway.  Gapipershad said she was still confused about what had transpired on Wednesday. To date the neighbour has failed to provide answers. A case has been opened at the Tongaat Police Station. She said she and her husband, who declined to be named, were on their way back home when she received a call informing her about the incident.  “I received a call from my mother-in-law who said that my dog had been shot two times while the kids were playing outside in the yard. When we reached home we found out that he was shot on his left shoulder. A local security company was on scene together with PACT, a animal welfare organisation, who took the dog to the veterinary clinic.” She said according to the information provided by her mother-in-law, Jadu was on the driveway when he was shot.  “He is a 10-year-old pitbull who has never been aggressive. We still don't know the reason because the guy hasn’t told us what exactly had happened. All we know is that he shot the dog and called for assistance from the neighbours.” Gapipershad said the bullet was still lodged in the dog's shoulder as the vet feared putting him under anaesthetic due to his age. She said the children were still traumatised over the incident. “My children are traumatised because of the gunshot sounds and the sight of the bleeding dog. To us, Jadu is not just a dog, he is part of the family who has been with us for the past 10 years. My kids grew up with him and we are all emotional, scared and stressed at the moment because we don't know what is going to happen due to his age,” she said. “We still don't know why he discharged his firearm and hasn't come forth to us with the reason for his actions,” she said. When the Sunday Tribune  contacted the policeman for a comment, he said he was not in a position to issue a  statement and was waiting to hear from his attorneys. Tanya Feicher, Durban and Coast SPCA marketing manager, said the owner lodged a call after-hours on Wednesday informing the shelter that their dog had been shot. “Our inspector attended the scene. When he arrived PACT were loading the animal to take it for veterinary treatment. The owner suspected the dog had been shot and wounds did appear to be gunshot-related,” she said. Feicher confirmed that the dog had been treated and was stable. “We advised the owner to open a case with SAPS,  informed her about the requirements and provided  contact details if further assistance was required,” she added. Provincial police spokesperson Lieutenant Colonel Nqobile Gwala confirmed that a case has been opened. “A case of malicious damage to property is being investigated by Tongaat SAPS. It is alleged that a dog was shot by a known suspect in La Mercy. The circumstances surrounding the incident are being investigated,” said Gwala.  Sunday Tribune