THE threat of the heavy concrete roof of the lifesavers building at Westbrook Beach, north of Durban, collapsing, because its structural integrity has been compromised, remains a big concern for local residents. Westbrook residents were irked that despite the eThekwini Municipality’s structural engineers “condemning” the building housing lifesavers and change-room facilities, last week, it was still being used. “If the city says the building is condemned, for me it is negligent for them not to close it down immediately. Condemnation means the building can collapse at any moment,” said Robert Mauvis, a Westbrook resident. Anyone who ventured into the building was walking the proverbial gauntlet, Mauvis said. Westbrook residents were fed up that the building had been neglected for a few years and that the beach only had “pilot blue flag status”. Therefore, to achieve full blue flag status, they took it upon themselves to renovate and paint the building with funds collected from residents. While workmen began with their facelift operation, they noticed the serious defects of the building’s pillars. They then engaged their own engineer, Leon Chris van Zyl from Ark Engineering, to conduct a visual rational assessment of the state of the building. Some of his findings included that the building’s columns, supporting the heavy concrete roof, had displayed spalling, which exposed excessive corrosion of concrete reinforcing, which Van Zyl said was an extreme structural weakness. Among his recommendations was that structural remedial work be carried out immediately. Geoff Pullan, the local ward councillor, conveyed the state of the building and residents’ fears to the municipality. In a written submission from a senior manager in the municipality’s structural engineering department to other heads, the official stated that the “structure was extremely unsafe”, a “collapse” was probable in the short and medium term. Hence, “the structure must be immediately cordoned off from the public” and the anticipated cost for a detailed investigation report would cost R50 000. “You don’t have to be a rocket scientist to know that something is wrong. R50 000 will just enrich someone, we should rather put the money into the rehabilitation of the building,” said Pullan. He stated that the building had fallen into a state of disrepair for some years and that the spalling became noticeable when workmen started to scrape paint off the walls. Pullan said it was about five years ago when the building was last painted. “That is generally the situation with the council with any infrastructure they put up. They never fix anything. “We need things speeded up, that is why we have the community’s outcry at the moment,” said Pullan. Christa Manias, another Westbrook resident, said they got involved with the upgrade and maintenance of the building because they wanted full “blue flag” beach status reinstated at Westbrook, which they had until 2019. Presently the beach has a pilot blue flag status. “Swimmers, surfers and others use the building. If this building is closed, they will have no toilet facilities.” Manias called for the building to be repaired in a short space of time. “They need to tell us how they will be using ratepayers’ money,” said Manias. Mauvis said there was “strong community togetherness” in Westbrook and when it came to issues of non-delivery of municipal and other services, they got involved. “Westbrook is another example of how the city maintains its facilities.” Another huge issue for Mauvis and the others was the constant sewage spillage on their beach. They pointed out that the sewage pump station across the road was out of order, and had caused the spillages. Mauvis said the municipality was responsible for all the sewage spills that occurred at the harbour, all the way up to the city’s northern beaches. “As a former vice-president of Tourism Durban, I noticed the city is being advertised as a great destination but that is false advertising. “They are inviting visitors to get sick here because the water is full of E coli,” said Mauvis. Tourism KZN asked the Sunday Tribune to direct their questions to Tourism Durban, who did not respond at the time of going to print. Nigel Ward, president of the Durban Chamber of Commerce and Industry NPC, said they were deeply concerned with the lack of maintenance on city infrastructure and beaches. “The state of the CBD continues to have a negative impact on the travel and tourism sector. Crime and grime are a serious concern as it is affecting the reputation of the city and province when it comes to national and international visitors and potential investors.” Ward believed the continued closure of the beaches because of the sewage spill continues to have a devastating and lasting effect on an already very battered tourism and hospitality industry. Msawakhe Mayisela, the municipality’s spokesperson said the city was aware of the matter and internal processes for the facility’s rehabilitation has begun, but they had suffered financial impairments due to Covid-19 and social unrest in the last three years. “Although repairs have not commenced, assessments have been done and we now wait for the project budget commitments to be initiated for the process to begin. “The city understands the urgency of the matter, and we are hopeful that the infrastructure rehabilitation will commence this financial year. “In the meantime, the structure is being cordoned off from the public. We warn residents to stay clear of the structure until the repair work is completed.” SUNDAY TRIBUNE