CURIOSITY and his grandmother’s influence got Ryne Ferguson birdwatching in his backyard at a young age, but his fascination and level of interaction with feathered creatures of flight has risen sharply over the years. Rescuing and nursing birds with serious injuries back to health has become a way of life for Ferguson. This month marks his second year at the Crocworld Conservation Centre, near Scottburgh, on KZN’s south coast, as their bird curator. In that time he has had a hand in the successful rescue and rehabilitation of dozens of birds. Educating communities about the characteristics, chirps, challenges and the contribution birds make to healthy ecosystems and environments are some of his other duties. To fly the bird conservation message further, Ferguson, 34, is mindful of the effectiveness of bird shows for that purpose. Producing Crocworld’s own bird show has been one of the key reasons Ferguson took up the position at the centre in 2020. However, the wings of that project were clipped somewhat when the Covid-19 pandemic struck, a month after he landed there. Ferguson is now optimistic that work on their planned show would begin in a few months and it would eventually be ready in about two years. Rescue work will continue to take centre stage in Ferguson’s daily routine, and each time a bird was released back into the wild after it was nursed back to health, it gave him “goosebump moments”. “It pulls you back to why I do this job,” he said. Ferguson was cognisant that the job had its “ups and downs” and described the downs to be the times when he and his team worked on a bird, and, in spite of their best efforts, they died. When working with injured animals, Ferguson said every decision taken had to be carefully considered. Therefore, those involved need to know and understand the behaviour of the birds they’ve worked with. A recent success was the work done on a spotted eagle owl, which is due for release in the near future. Members of the Umdoni Christian Academy alerted Ferguson about the plight of the bird, having noticed that it was “flat”, its wings were dropped and legs lying behind. Ferguson instincts told him it was a “poisoning” related case. “Spotted eagle owls eat a lot of insects and it could have eaten one that came across poison and got poisoned in that way,” he reasoned. He needed to know how to stabilise the bird and then took it to a vet for treatment. While the bird rested at the centre afterwards, Ferguson tubed it with activated charcoal to absorb much of the poison from the animal’s stomach. When it was ready to be moved to the Centre for the Rehabilitation of Wildlife (Crow), Ferguson said it looked “more perky”. He said this species of bird, which has curved wings that allow it to fly silently, without a “whooshing” sound, was popular in South Africa, but they were becoming rarer because of feeding on rodents and insects that were poisoned. “If we hadn’t worked on this bird as quickly as we did, it would have probably died,” he said. With the south coast being rich with bird life, Ferguson believes the area needed a rehabilitation facility like the Crow. “People generally don’t know what to do with injured birds. We have become the depot for such birds,” he said. Ferguson noticed more people were beginning to live on the south coast, resulting in more human and bird interaction. Upon receiving injured birds Ferguson tries his best to have them “stabilised”, before sending them for rehab. He’s mindful that not all rescued birds make it back into the wild, like “Isis”, the African fish eagle that has become the centre's ambassador. African fish eagles are best known for the distinct call, also regarded as the “voice of Africa”. Ferguson said Isis was a juvenile when she was found on the side of the road in the Hluhluwe area. When Isis got to Crow, it had a fractured right wing, which fused in an incorrect position, and the deformity couldn’t be corrected. Isis was unable to fly, and instead of putting down the animal, it was sent to Crocworld and became their ambassador. “All you have to do is say ‘Hello Isis’ and it will let out its call,” he said. Unteaching myths about certain birds was another conservation effort Ferguson and his team were invested in. “In some cultures, people believe that if an owl is in your area, it was sent there by a witch and this could potentially lead to a death in your family. “We have rescued owls with their eyes gouged because some have the belief their family members were going to die, if it looked at them.” Ferguson’s bird sense and fondness for wildlife became evident when he pursued birds and bugs in the backyard garden of his Joburg home. “I don’t know why, but something about them grabbed my attention.,“ he said. There was no turning back for him after a couple, who were relocating overseas, left behind their two Australian zebra finches with him. “I had an aviary for them and that was the start of many, many birds coming into our yard,” he said. One of Ferguson’s other places of employment, before Crocworld, was KZN Crane Foundation. There, he was involved in the rearing of critically endangered wattle cranes for release into the wild, not before attaching tracking devices to them for monitoring purposes. ‘When I was about 8-years-old I caught birds in my garden with little traps and ringed them so I could watch their movements after they were released,” he said. Little did he realise it was preparation for similar tasks, later on in life. Ferguson believes birds were attracted to their garden because his granny fed them. “Nowadays, I tell people it’s an inappropriate thing to do because the birds would become dependent on humans for food and lose their natural ability to fend for themselves,” he said. While still in school, he would spend weekends and public holidays at the Rietvlei Zoo Farm, which is linked to the Joburg Zoo, “learning absolutely everything and anything from everyone.” After matric, he got a part-time position at the zoo, helping with pest control and other jobs. He then worked in Montecasino’s Bird Garden. There, he functioned as a bird show presenter and eventually became the show manager. In between, he travelled overseas, where he received guidance from some of the world’s best bird trainers. “Bird trainers train birds to perform their natural behaviour at shows so that people could see what they do in the wild and get an education in that way. “When people see something up close, and are able to touch it, they make a better connection with animals and do more to preserve it,” he said. In 2018 he got called to well known conservationist Steve Irwin’s Australia Zoo to guide them with their own bird show. “I taught them some of the tricks of the trade,” he said. On joining Crocworld, Ferguson said he noticed the centre had shifted its mandate over the years from being purely a crocodile farm, when it was established by the Crookes Brothers in 1985, towards total conservation education. And instead of focusing only on reptiles, they also took in birds. “They were looking for someone who had extensive bird experience and they also had a bird show in mind. “I appreciated the opportunity to start something from scratch on the south coast,” said Ferguson. SUNDAY TRIBUNE