Durban — Political analysts and academics have said gatekeeping and political capital was the reason the Cabinet recycles the old guard such as Barney Pityana to key strategic positions in government so that they may advance their own political interests while denying the youth to lead. Political analysts and academics weighed in on the Cabinet’s decision to appoint the 76-year-old Pityana as chair of the National Lotteries Commission. Former diplomat and political analyst Botsang Moiloa said that the problem was not only with those who are accepting these appointments but also with the Cabinet members who over the years have used their gatekeepers to advance their narrow interests and enrich themselves. “It cannot be right to keep such old people because the thinking is so old that they cannot be entrusted with the responsibility of planning the future because they are simply tired and will certainly not form part of the future. “I question Pityana who today has closed doors to young people from assuming the responsibility of leadership. What he should have done is deny the appointment and say that he could help identify a young person he may have mentored. Professor Pityana is being greedy and visionless, he is actively gatekeeping Independent political analyst and lecturer at the University of Limpopo Dr Metji Makgoba echoed Moiloa and stated that Pityana’s appointment was a sign that the country was not growing in terms of leadership. He said that there was a renewal of recycling the same people in the public sector and that a recognisable number of people were being moved around the state entities as board members. “If you look at the boards in various state institutions you find the same recycled leaders being rotated in key positions. There is a class system in South Africa in which the same people are being moved both in the private and the public sector. “This is a reflection of a problem of leadership in the country. It says that for the past 20 years there has not been growth of young people who have developed key strategic administrative positions. It also goes back to the revolving door in which members of universities who have worked as vice-chancellors are preferred by ministers who use them as advisers.” Makgoba continued: “This is a serious problem and we need to have conversations around the matter.” However, Unisa’s Professor Tumi Senokoena defended Pityana and said he had a great leadership record and would use his experience to rebuild the commission. “Perhaps the doubt is that younger people might have other interests but this is not always the case because the older people might have their own narrow interests, but Pityana does have a clean record to rebuild the image of that organisation,” said Senokoane. The Department of Trade, Industry, and Competition issued a statement on Tuesday welcoming the appointment of Pityana. Daily News