CORPORAL TSHIMOLLOYABOTSHELO MATSHA ​Durban — Lieutenant Phakamani Mavimbela, 31, born at Empangeni in KwaZulu-Natal, is one rising star to be identified within the South African Air Force. He shined at the recent Officers Commissioning Parade held at the SA Air Force College in Thaba Tshwane where he left with three trophies. He is one of the students who recently graduated from Cuba from an exchange Foreign Learning Programme. The SA Air Force sends students on a foreign learning programme to tighten the bonds between the two countries, broaden knowledge and expose the selected students. After doing the Basic Military Training in 2014, Lt Phakamani was based at 68 Air School for Aircraft Radiotrician (Avionic) studies and in 2016 he was transferred to 6 Air Servicing Unit at Air Force Base Bloemspruit for practicals and there he qualified as an artisan in September 2017. “In 2018, I was nominated to embark on the Foreign Learning Programme in Cuba to further my studies which included Indoctrination of Military Doctrine and Philosophy,” Mavimbela said. There, he successfully completed his Advance Diploma at Instituto Tecnico Militar Jose Marti and in June 2021 he graduated with a gold medal for a high standard of performance. “My experience in Cuba was a learning curve which contributed highly towards the leadership and management skills that I espouse. The skills and knowledge acquired during the training were built up on the laid foundation by the Cuban training programme,” Mavimbela said. Being in the engineering mustering in the SA Air Force, motivation goes a long way and it is very much noticed in all directions. “I find inspiration in a variety of people and things around me. I would have to say that the person who has greatly inspired me is my grandmother and the passionate work of Colonel Samukelo Vilakazi,’” Mavimbela said. Lieutenant Mavimbela is currently being developed as a technologist at 5ASU at Air Force Base Waterkloof. Asked about his new rank and responsibilities, he said: “My duties as a young officer are to make sure that technical level duties are completed as required; service is what I live by.” With academics being first on his priority list, Lieutenant Mavimbela prides himself and the youth on education. “Education is everything these days, young as we are, we should study as much as we can because soon everything will require a qualification,” he said. A mantra he lives by is, “All is well”, he said, “Even when things do not go my way or seem too difficult, I calm myself and take a step forward to come up with a solution. “I grew up with my grandparents and my two young siblings. I look up to my grandmother, and her love sustained me. When I had to leave for Cuba, her illnesses took over but here am I living it all for her,” Mavimbela shared. Corporal Tshimolloyabotshelo Matsha is a military journalist for the SA Air Force magazine called the Ad Astra. Daily News