Durban - ANC deputy secretary-general Jessie Duarte lost her battle with cancer and passed away on Sunday, July 17, 2022 at the age of 68. The ANC said in a statement that the party learned of Duarte’s passing in the early hours of Sunday morning. “The ANC expresses its heartfelt condolences to the Duarte, Dangor and Whitley extended families, loved ones and friends. She was both a tower of strength to the organisation as well as a matriarch and pillar of her family. Comrade Jesse was undergoing cancer treatment and had been on medical leave since November,” said ANC national spokesperson Pule Mabe. Mabe said the death of Duarte is a great loss to her family, the democratic movement and the country as a whole. He said as a former diplomat, not only will Duarte be mourned in SA but also in other countries on the African continent as well as internationally. “She dedicated her entire life to the struggle for a united, non-racial, non-sexist, democratic, prosperous and just South Africa. A committed gender activist, she relentlessly championed the emancipation and empowerment of women. Her life and work reflected a consistent commitment to advancing the rights of the poor and marginalised,” said Mabe. Cosatu National Spokesperson Sizwe Pamla said the trade union is deeply saddened by the passing of Duarte and sent condolences to the ANC, her family, colleagues, and friends. Pamla said the union will forever remember Duarte as a champion of women empowerment, solid advocate for social justice and a formidable leader. “Comrade Jessie Duarte served the ANC with merit and aplomb at many levels. Her many years of activism saw her rise from building the then Federation of Transvaal Women, to being active in the United Democratic Front -- and working with the late Beyers Naude to empower young people with educational opportunities -- to rising to the most senior ranks in the liberation movement and the democratic government. “In her years as national leader in the ANC she worked very closely with the Federation to unite the Alliance and keep it focused on its work and commitments to the people despite challenges. She believed in and strove to build a strong alliance,” said Pamla. The EFF said Duarte was a fierce, firm and forthright person who paid her dues in the struggle for liberation in SA. “Duarte will be remembered fondly by many young men and women, who passed through her hands and grew through her guidance. The ANC has lost a committed member. The EFF sent the party’s condolences to the family, friends, colleagues and the ANC. The ANC said Duarte will be buried Sunday afternoon in Johannesburg according to Muslim rites. THE MERCURY