Durban - The South African Breweries (SAB) has partnered with the government to bring much-needed relief to flood victims in eThekwini Municipality, fixing broken water supply and giving away food packages to displaced families.  The initiative comes after the catastrophic inclement weather conditions over the weekend for the second time in two months.  The SAB pledged a donation of R800 000 through the Gift of the Givers which will administer the funds through supplying the relief.  The SAB executive collaborated with Deputy Minister of Social Development, Hendrietta Bogopane-Zulu to handover food parcels and dignity packs to families that have been displaced by the floods. Zoleka Lisa from SAB said over 250 families received flood relief food hampers and dignity packs from SAB and the Department of Social Development. She said further support was also provided by the organisation to the eThekwini Municipality in a bid to ensure that the region has a smooth running of water supply in the south of Durban.  “In Isipingo Hills, SAB supplied teams to manufacture and install the support for the main pipeline supplying water to the Isipingo Hills reservoir, she said.  The major brewery company also provided earth moving machinery to the municipality to capacitate the workers.  Among them, SAB provided an excavator, driver, and supervisory resources to further enable works on the installation of a new PVC pipeline in Prince Mshiyeni Memorial Hospital.  While the water supply was down, SAB supplied over 500 000 litres of water to the hospital with water tanker trucks, said Lisa. “It is in these times that I am inspired by my fellow South Africans, but also saddened that so many have lost so much,” she stated. “We will continue to work with government and social partners to aid the people affected by this disaster. We implore anyone and everyone who has capacity to help these people to do so as soon as possible. Every little bit helps, and they need all the help they can get,” she added. SUNDAY TRIBUNE