Durban - Well-known South African economist Mike Schüssler passed away earlier today from cancer-related health complications.  Tributes and messages of condolence have been shared by friends and colleagues. Trade union UASA said it extended its heartfelt condolences to Schüssler’s family and friends.  “Schüssler passed away earlier today from cancer-related health complications. UASA takes note of Schüssler’s considerable contribution to the South African economy as an economist and shaping UASA’s economic perspective through researching and presenting the annual UASA South African Employment Report (SAER) for two decades.” UASA added that Schüssler’s more recent presentations included the 19th UASA SAER on the effects of the Covid-19 pandemic on the South African economy and jobs in 2020 and the 20th UASA SAER, for which he researched and presented his views on South Africa’s unemployment crisis in a post-Covid world.  “Schüssler also addressed economic challenges and possible solutions to overcome the desperate unemployment situation in South Africa at UASA’s 7th Congress at the Misty Hills Conference Centre in Krugersdorp, Gauteng, in October 2021.” UASA said that Schüssler had founded Economists.co.za in 2005.  According to its site, Schüssler was named South African Economist of the Year twice since 2005 and came fourth in 2010 in the Reuters economic competition. UASA said that on behalf of its national executive committee, staff and members, it wanted to express heartfelt condolences to his family and loved ones.  “We hope and pray that they will receive all the support they need during this challenging time.” Gavin Kelly, CEO of the Road Freight Association, said the association had learnt of Schüssler’s passing with great sadness. “Mike was the economist at the RFA and was responsible for crisp, direct and factual economic analyses over the years. He also developed and provided the industry with the Road Freight Indices.” Kelly added: Our sincere condolences go to Greta and his family. We will miss you, Mike. A great stalwart of the industry has fallen. May he rest in peace.” ALSO READ: – Jamie Bartlett described as a ‘master of his craft’ and ‘role model to young actors’ MOST READ: – Public Alert: Alleged robbery suspect seen wearing an IPSS jacket stolen from an officer – Family ‘shaken’ by home invasion in Reservoir Hills, brazen gang forced their way in at gunpoint – Big black mamba seeks shelter from heavy rains, flooding in Mariannhill property – Water supply to KZN North Coast reduced after Avondale pump station damaged during weekend floods – KZN takes another beating: OThongathi and uMdloti suffer severe damage to roads, houses, waterworks THE MERCURY